---
layout: single
title:  "1.Computed tomography"
category: "Computed tomography"
tag: [Computed tomography, CT]
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
toc_label: CONTENTS
toc_icon: "fa-solid fa-seedling" # More icons: https://fontawesome.com/v6/search?ic=free
author_profile: false
sidebar:
    nav: "counts"
search: true # Change true to false if you don't want to have this article be searched 
redirect_from:
    - /Computed tomography/CT_0
use_math: true
---

**[Reference]** <br>
$\bullet$ Computed Tomography: Principles, Design, Artifacts, and Recent Advances <br>
$\bullet$ Computed Tomography: From Photon Statistics to Modern Cone-Beam CT
{: .notice--success}

# 0.Introduction
​	Computed Tomography (CT) is a powerful imaging modality in the medical field that utilizes X-rays to generate detailed images of the body's internal structures. <br>
This non-invasive technique provides crucial diagnostic information without any invasion into body. <br>
While other imaging techniques like magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and positron emission tomography (PET) have emerged, CT remains the most widely used imaging technology in diagnostic radiology due to its speed, accessibility, and high spatial resolution.<br>

Nevertheless, CT technology still faces several challenges, such as radiation dose and image artifacts.<br>
These limitations present exciting opportunities for improvement, particularly with the integration of modern Artificial Intelligence (AI).<br>
To fully appreciate these challenges and potential solutions, an understanding of the basics is essential. <br>

In this post, we will begin by exploring the fundamental types of CT systems and how X-rays are generated.	



# 1.Types of CT

​	Types of CT can be sorted by its beam geometry. 

## 1-1) Parallel-beam geometry
{% include start-side-by-side.html
  image_src="../images/2025-06-20-CT_1/image-20250620151406465.png"
  image_alt="Fig.1.1 Parallel-beam geometry diagram."
  image_width="40%"
%}
CT with parallel-beam geometry is also known as first-generation CT.
In this design, a single, pencil-like X-ray beam is used to acquire tomographic data.
The X-ray source and a single detector move linearly together to scan the object.
After completing one linear scan, the source-detector assembly rotates by a small increment (typically 1 degree) and repeats the process until a full 180-degree rotation is complete.<br>
While this method was revolutionary at the time, its major drawbacks were a very long scan time and high sensitivity to motion artifacts.<br>
{% include end-side-by-side.html %}

## 1-2) Fan-beam geometry
{% include start-side-by-side.html
  image_src="../images/2025-06-20-CT_1/img.png"
  image_alt="Fig.1.2 Fan-beam geometry diagram."
  image_width="40%"
%}
CT systems using fan-beam geometry are also known as third-generation CT.
Unlike the first generation's pencil beam, this generation utilizes an X-ray beam shaped like a fan.
Consequently, the single detector is replaced by an array of detectors arranged in a curved band.
This source-detector assembly also rotates around the object, but it operates much faster than the first-generation systems.
{% include end-side-by-side.html %}

## 1-3) Cone-beam geometry
{% include start-side-by-side.html
  image_src="../images/2025-06-20-CT_1/img-1750748174982-37.png"
  image_alt="Fig.1.3 Cone-beam geometry diagram."
  image_width="40%"
%}
Cone-beam CT (CBCT) is an advanced version of the third-generation CT.
It further widens the fan-beam into a cone-shaped X-ray beam, which is paired with a large, two-dimensional (2D) flat-panel detector.
This key difference—using a 2D detector to capture a cone beam—allows the entire volume of an object to be scanned in a single rotation.<br>
As a result, CBCT significantly shortens scan times compared to previous generations.
{% include end-side-by-side.html %}


# 2.X-ray source
In the previous section, we looked at the three types of CT.<br>
Now, we will focus on X-rays and how they are generated.

## 2-1) X-ray
{% include start-side-by-side.html
  image_src="../images/2025-06-20-CT_1/image-20250624162250674.png"
  image_alt="Fig.2.1 Illustration of the electromagnetic spectrum."
  image_width="50%"
%}
To begin, an X-ray is a form of electromagnetic wave.
However, the term "X-ray" does not apply to the entire electromagnetic spectrum.
As shown left side, the spectrum is divided into different regions, each with a unique name and characteristics. X-rays are simply one specific part of this spectrum.
{% include end-side-by-side.html %}

What's important to note here is that the X-ray region of the spectrum is defined by its energy.
This leads to the question: how is the energy of an X-ray defined?
Energy of X-ray photon is defined as below:



$$
\text{The energy of each X-ray photon}, E=h\nu=\frac{hc}{\lambda} \quad \text{where, } 
\begin{array}{l} 
h \text{: Planck's constant}, 6.63\times10^{-34}[J\cdot s] \newline
\mathcal{A} \text{: projection operator} \newline
\mathbf{f} \text{: Linear attenuation coefficient}
\end{array} 
$$


$$
\begin{bmatrix}
1&1
\end{bmatrix}
$$

$x+y$

$$x+y$$