---
layout: single
title:  "1.Object & Data type"
category: "Python"
tag: [Python]
header:
  teaser: #../images/2025-07-08-CT_6/image-20250708184503610.png
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
toc_label: CONTENTS
toc_icon: "fa-solid fa-seedling" # More icons: https://fontawesome.com/v6/search?ic=free
author_profile: false
sidebar:
    nav: "counts"
search: true # Change true to false if you don't want to have this article be searched 
redirect_from:
    - /Python/Python_1
use_math: true
---

**[Reference]** <br>
$\bullet$ [홍정모의 파이썬 프로그래밍 추월코스](https://www.honglab.ai/courses/python)<br>
This post is written based on above lecture.<br>
All contents in this post are not the same with above lecture.<br>
Please show the detail at the his lecture.
{: .notice--success}

# 1. Object and Data type
{% include start-box.html class="math-box"%}
In python, everything is an **_object_**.
Python processes all data in memory as a object.
Various type of object are classified by the **_value_** they can hold and what they **_can do_**.

The definition of what data an object consists of and what actions it can perform is called a **_data type_**.
There are various data type provided by Python or we can create our own data type. 
<div class="indented-paragraph" markdown="1">
int, float, str...
</div>

We can check the data type as below.
```python
# Use function type()
type(10), type(8.15), type("Python")
```
```python
(int, float, str)
```
{% include end-box.html %}

# 2. Object & Literal
{% include start-box.html class="math-box"%}
When we input the numbers 30 and 5, it means we are creating integer objects with the respective values of 30 and 5.

```python
30 + 5
```
```python
35
```

The addition symbol (+) signifies a request to take the values from the two objects created from 30 and 5, add them, and create a new object with the value 35.
<div class="indented-paragraph" markdown="1">
- Symbols like 30 and 5, where we directly input the data's value, are called **_literals_**, meaning "as written."
- Symbols that command an operation, such as addition (+) and subtraction (-), are called **_operators_**.
</div>
{% include end-box.html %}

# 3. Name of object
{% include start-box.html class="math-box"%}
If we give a name on the generated object, we can use it after generation by calling it's name.
The name of object is called **_variable_**.

```python 
a = 30 + 5
```

In python, (=) is not meaning 'same'.
It means that the name of righthand side result is 'a'.
(=) is called **_assignment operator_**.
It dose not print out the result on the shell.

If we want to check the ID of the object, we can use function `id`.
Same id means that the objects are same.

```python
id(a)
```
```python
2373625184592
```

In python, to change the value of some data types like `int`, `float` and `str`, we must create a new object.
{% include end-box.html %}

# 4. How to use object
{% include start-box.html class="math-box"%}
We can use the object's **_attributes_** and **_methods_** by typing dot (.) after the name of object. (Datails are can be checked [here](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/intellisense#_types-of-completions))
<div class="indented-paragraph" markdown="1">
- method: A function contained within an object. It defines what that object can do.
- attribute: The components that make up a **_class_** are called attributes. In Python, anything that can be used by placing a dot after a variable is called an attribute.
</div>
Detailed explanation of function or class will be handled in later post.

```python
a = 10
b = a.__add__(5)

print(b)
```
```python
15
```
{% include end-box.html %}