---
layout: single
title:  "Review: Likelihood-based bilateral filters for pre-estimated basis sinograms using photon-counting CT"
category: "Paper review"
tag: [Computed tomography, CT, Photon counting CT, PCCT, Sinogram]
# header:
#   teaser: ../images/2025-07-08-CT_6/image-20250708184503610.png
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
toc_label: CONTENTS
toc_icon: "fa-solid fa-seedling" # More icons: https://fontawesome.com/v6/search?ic=free
author_profile: false
sidebar:
    nav: "counts"
search: true # Change true to false if you don't want to have this article be searched 
redirect_from:
    - /Paper review/PR_1
use_math: true
# published: false
---

**[Link to the paper]** <br>
[Likelihood-based bilateral filters for pre-estimated basis sinograms using photon-counting CT](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36705079/)
{: .notice--success}

# Abstract
{% include start-box.html class="math-box"%}
$\bullet$ Background
: Photon-Counting CT (PCCT) is promising but suffers from noise amplification during material decomposition. Current noise-reduction methods often degrade spatial resolution and accuracy.

$\bullet$ Purpose
: This paper proposes a "Likelihood-Based Bilateral Filter" (LBF) which can be allplied to pre-estimated basis sinogram. Unlike conventional filters that compare pixel intensity, this filter compares the statistical likelihood of neighboring measurements to more effectively reduce noise while preserving edges.

$\bullet$ Method
1. Perform maximum-likelihood (ML)-based estimation in the projection domain to obtain basis sinograms.
2. Calculate the neighborhood likelihoods for a given measurement at the center pixel using the neighborhood estimates.
3. Design the weights based on the distance of these likelihoods. Furthermore, the paper introduces two variations of this filter: one that uses statistical significance levels instead of empirical hyperparameters, and another measurement-based version applicable even without system models.

$\bullet$ Validation
: The proposed methods (the main LBF and its variations) were validated by analyzing the local property of noise and spatial resolution and the global trend of noise and bias. They were compared to the conventional neighborhood filters and the model-based iterative reconstruction with an edge-preserving penalty applied in the basis images.
{% include end-box.html %}